In Shogun, you play the role of resourceful English seaman
John Blackthorne, Pilot-Major of the Dutch trader-warship
Erasmus, which is on a secret mission of trade and plunder
to the Spanish-dominated Pacific Ocean.

The year is 1600, and the powerful Catholic empire of Spain
and Portugal is locked in a death struggle with the upstart
Protestant nations of England and Holland. The Catholic
nations have spread their political and religious influence
across the world, reaching as far as China and the almost
mythical land of Japan, extracting great wealth in spices
and precious metals. Their extensive knowledge of the Asian
seaways is highly secret information coveted by English and
Dutch traders. But while the European powers battle each
other, a longer and even more vicious struggle is raging among
the feudal lords of Japan.

After hundreds of years of anarchy, Japan was unified by the
great warrior Nakamura, who became Taiko, or military ruler.
But the Taiko has died, leaving as heir a seven-year-old
boy, and a five-man Council of Regents to rule in his name.
The dominant figures on the Council are Lord Toranaga and
Lord Ishido. Each is a daimyo: powerful warrior-rulers who
follow the ancient samurai traditions. Each harbors the
ambition to be Shogun: supreme ruler under the divine but
nearly powerless Emperor.

Toranaga and Ishido are each backed by lesser daimyos and
hordes of samurai. They jockey for position, nearly
evenly matched, looking for any way of bolstering their
chances. Perhaps the Jesuits will swing their support behind
one candidate, or hostages will neutralize a powerful
supporter. The balance is delicate, and the appearance of the
Erasmus creates excitement and new possibilities.

It is into the center of this momentous conflict that you,
John Blackthorne, have been thrown, and soon you discover
that the perils of the sea are almost trifling compared to
the danger and intrigue among the samurai lords of Japan.

Life in Japan can be a hazardous affair. If you choose the
wrong friends or confidants, you may find your head detached
from your body. But strict adherence to the rules of
etiquette, some judicious questions, and careful listening
will enhance your pleasure, prestige, and prospects for
survival.

Shogun is one of a new family of Infocom stories which
utilize vivid graphics to enhance the story. So now, along
with the quality interactive fiction that you've come to
expect from Infocom, you can also expect beautiful artwork
as well. You'll find that the art in Shogun is tied very
closely to the story and gives you a "fine-focus" on the
mood or locale as you play the role of John Blackthorne.
