Puzzles marked with a + have "happy" endings: they can be solved in the
usual sense.  Those marked with a - can't be solved in the sense that
there is a happy ending, or a way to reach the stated goal.  Those marked
with a . have a partial solution (you can get part of the goal)

Blackthorne
    (Goal is to survive, to regain his ship, to return to England. Later,
    to learn Japanese, prove he's not a barbarian, and to keep Mariko.)
	+ Reef/Arrival: pilot Erasmus through reef, avoid being washed
	  overboard
	. The Pit: prevent Yabu from killing anyone, become civilized
	+ Rescuing Rodrigues: tying kimonos, getting Yabu's attention
	+ Suicide Attempt: must go through with it
	+ Surviving in Prison: beat up baddies, become friends with
	   Fr. Domingo, don't reveal that you're English
	+ Learning Japanese: this goes on throughout the game, but there
	  is a long sequence soon after you first meet Mariko
	. The Pheasant: you could probably throw it away?
	+ Teaching Toranaga to dive/not beating him in race
	+ Toranaga's Escape from Osaka Castle
	   Diversion: must notice that old woman is really Toranaga
	   Battle at/in harbor: must thread way through maze of streets,
	    get to ship, get by Rodrigues in harbor
	+ Rescuing Toranaga from Earthquake
	- Saving Mariko from her suicide: prevent Mariko from committing
	   suicide (can't "win" because it is only Oshido who can do this)
	- Saving Mariko during battle at Osaka Castle: if you save Mariko
	   the point of the suicide/battle is lost, also, she "wants" to
	   die.  You can, however, prevent her from being kidnapped by the
	   ninja.

Mariko
    (Goal is to atone for her father's sin and gain revenge against the
    Taiko and Ishido (by helping Toranaga). Later, to keep her affair with
    Blackthorne secret, to somehow have him without compromising her
    position.)
	Teaching Blackthorne Japanese
	Falling in love with Blackthorne
	Avoiding rape by Portuguese
	Suicide Attempt
	Attack on Osaka Castle

Toranaga
    (Goal is to become Shogun.)
	Escape from Osaka Castle
	 Disguise as a woman
	 Battle at/in harbor
	Influencing other daimyos
	 Zataki
	 Kiyama
	Detecting Yabu's treachery

Omi
    (Goal is increased power and influence, ultimately to replace Yabu as
    head of the Kasigi clan.)
	Taming Blackthorne
	The Musket Regiment
	Getting Kiku

Yabu
    (Goal is increased power and influence, perhaps ultimately to be Shogun,
    but more immediately to avoid detection as a traitor.)
	The Waiting Barbarian
	Betrayal of Toranaga
	Attack on Osaka Castle
	 Killing Sumiyori
	 Letting in the ninja

Ferriera
    (Goal is to destroy Blackthorne, failing that, his ship. Long-term,
    wealth for himself and decreased influence for the Jesuits.)
	Neutralizing Blackthorne
	Gaining the upper hand vs. the Jesuits
	Killing B. after he is released from Osaka

...more possible characters...

dell'Aqua

Alvito

Rodrigues

Ochiba

Ishido

Usagi

Mura
