			   SHOGUN

Prologue.
    Storm and Reef.

Book One:

1.  (p. 25)

    Blackthorne wakes up in Anjiro.  Blackthorne meets
    Father Sebastio. Omi kills a peasant. Trying to get the
    rutters.  Meeting survivors. Mura forces Blackthorne to
    take a bath.

2.  (p. 53)

    First meeting with Yabu, who snuck out of Yedo to meet
    Blackthorne.  Yabu interrogates Blackthorne. Blackthorne
    intimidates Sebastio.  Blackthorne defiles a crucifix.
    Omi suggests to Yabu that the crew can be used.
    Blackthorne and crew put in cellar.  Blackthorne
    remembers his bath.  "You will begin to act like decent
    human beings."  One of the crew is to die, and they are
    to choose.

3.  (p. 67)

    Yabu steals the muskets.  How Yabu heard about the ship.
    Background about the political situation. Yabu gets a
    massage from Suwo. Suwo tells about the origin of Yabu's
    Murasama blade. Suwo refrains from killing Yabu. The
    crew draws straws, Vinck is the loser.

4.  (p. 83)

    Blackthorne defies the samurai, they capture one, but
    take Pieterzoon.  Yabu meditates while Pieterzoon is
    tortured.

5.  (p. 98)

    Kiku's night with Yabu.  Funeral pyre of Pieterzoon.
    Blackthorne tries to give the prisoner water, but he
    tries to suicide.

6.  (p. 110)

    Blackthorne is taken out of the pit.  Blackthorne
    confronts Omi and Fr. Sebastio. Omi takes Croocq, and
    Blackthorne agrees to behave. Omi pisses on Blackthorne.
    Omi suggests Blackthorne be taught Japanese. Yabu puts
    Omi in charge of the crew. "The Waiting Barbarian." Omi
    suggests Yabu keep the ship. Toranaga's galley arrives.

7.  (p. 119)

    Toda Hiro-matsu arrives in galley. Yabu realizes he's
    been betrayed. Toranaga confiscates the ship and all its
    contents. Yabu insists the ship is a gift to Toranaga.
    Hiro-matsu orders Yabu to return with him to Osaka. H.
    orders Yabu to send Blackthorne to Osaka as well.
    Blackthorne sees Omi and Kiku talking. Flashback of how
    Blackthorne came to work for the Dutch. Blackthorne
    meets Rodrigues as he is forced into Hiro-matsu's
    galley. Rodrigues agrees to help Blackthorne retrieve
    his gear. They row to the Erasmus, intimidate the
    guards. The rutters are gone. Omi lets the crew out of
    the pit. Kiku and Omi together. Omi's wife Midori and
    Omi's shrewish mother meet Kiku.

8.  (p. 157)

    Voyage to Osaka. Rodrigues questions Blackthorne about
    the rutter. Blackthorne takes the watch. They steer for
    shore to avoid a coming storm. Flashback to Sebastio
    giving Rodrigues a sealed package for Alvito.
    Blackthorne almost goes overboard. Blackthorne given the
    helm. They escape the rocks. Rodrigues washed overboard.
    They make harbor. Blackthorne faces down Hiro-matsu to
    go after Rodrigues. Yabu asks to lead the shore party.

9. (p. 173)

    They find Rodrigues. Blackthorne almost falls and he
    realizes Yabu has been ordered to keep him safe.
    Blackthorne hooks Yabu into going after Rodrigues. (Yabu
    was on deck rowing). (Yabu decides he must control the
    sea and the Anjin). Yabu falls the last twenty feet.
    Yabu reaches Rodrigues and realizes he's still alive.
    The tide comes in; Yabu prepares to die; Blackthorne
    tries to find a ledge. They make a rope of kimonos. A
    samurai jumps to attract Yabu's attention. They are
    rescued finally when ropes arrive from the ship.

Book Two:

10. (p. 187)

    Rest of voyage to Osaka; superiority of Japanese
    medicine. Rodrigues gives more background on the Taiko
    and the Jesuits. Blackthorne sees Osaka Castle for the
    first time. Blackthorne sees Grays (Ishido's men) for
    the first time. They go through the maze of Osaka
    Castle, enter Toranaga's keep. (Hiro-matsu has heard
    that Onishi and Kiyama, the Christian daimyos, may be
    about to defect.)

11. (p. 198)

    Blackthorne meets Toranaga, who is tending a falcon.
    Blackthorne doesn't abase himself, but bows and sits.
    Alvito (Tsukku-san) introduces himself. Toranaga
    questions Blackthorne; about Christianity, his voyage,
    etc. "There are no mitigating circumstances when it
    comes to rebellion." "Unless you win." (Flashback to
    Alvito's worries; the Jesuits have the rutters.) Ishido
    arrives, interrupting the interview. Toranaga sends
    Blackthorne to prison.

12. (p. 214)

    Ishido and Toranaga spar over Toranaga's ambitions.
    Background about history; Goroda, a minor daimyo, became
    Dictator but was assassinated by one of his generals;
    Nakamura, his chief vassal, becomes Kwampaku, then
    Taiko, then dies (a year ago.) The Council requests
    Ochiba's presence in Osaka immediately. Ishido insults
    the nobles; Usagi prepares to kill him but restrains
    himself; Ishido was hoping he would die. Toranaga
    pronounces sentence on Usagi.

13. (p. 219)

    Toranaga muses; vows Blackthorne will never leave.
    Toranaga and Hiro-matsu discuss Blackthorne; they
    realize the Portuguese have lied to them on several
    counts. Kiri-chan, Toranaga's mistress, is introduced.
    (How Toranaga met Kiritsubo, and how he became an ally
    of Nakamura.) Hiro-matsu urges Toranaga to become
    Shogun; he evaluates the other regents, rejecting them
    all. Toranaga sends a message to Sudara saying he will
    leave in four days. Toranaga refuses Hiro-matsu's
    request that his granddaughter Fujiko be allowed to die
    (wife of Usagi.) Description of "Crimson Sky."

14. (p. 228)

    Blackthorne in prison. Fight over food and water.
    Blackthorne meets the Franciscan, Fr. Domingo. Fr.
    Domingo, mistaking him for a Spaniard, fills him in.
    about the Black Ship, the activities of the Jesuits,
    etc. Fr. Domingo reveals that there is no prison, only
    death. Tells about the Martyrdom at Nagasaki, and more
    about history, teaches Blackthorne some more Japanese.
    Blackthorne is called.

15. (p. 242)

    Grays take Blackthorne out of the prison. (Flashback to
    death of Alban Caradoc.) Grays take Blackthorne through
    the city; cleanliness of Japan. Ambush of Grays by
    "Grays" (bandits) in the forest. Yabu rescues
    Blackthorne from the bandits. Blackthorne demonstrates
    his Japanese.

16. (p. 252)

    Ishido and Toranaga argue; Ishido was supposedly going
    to take Blackthorne to Yaemon, but the Bandits were
    actually his men. (Japanese methods of time.) Scheming;
    Toranaga has Ishido's mother hostage; the meeting of the
    regents is postponed due to Kiyama's "illness." (Chinese
    astrologer's predictions about deaths of Toranaga and
    Ishido.) Hiro-matsu predicts that Toranaga will be
    impeached.

    Kiri and Mariko meet; we get Mariko's history; her
    father was the assassin of Goroda, her husband Buntaro
    is Hiro-matsu's son; Mariko is thirty, and these events
    happened sixteen years ago.  Mariko is to interpret for
    Toranaga and Blackthorne

    Blackthorne meets Mariko; he is to be interviewed by
    Toranaga and Yaemon in a tea-house. Mariko speaks
    Portuguese, Spanish, and Latin.  Blackthorne winks at
    the Heir.  Blackthorne is questioned about England, and
    draws a world map. Blackthorne tells how he got the
    rutter.  Blackthorne admits he likes baths. Blackthorne
    tells about the Pope dividing the world.  Yodoko, widow
    of the Taiko, arrives.

17. (p. 277)

    Yodoko is sent to fetch Yaemon by Ishido. Genjiko is
    pregnant. (Ochiba's sister Genjiko is married to Sudara;
    she is a defense against Ochiba) Toranaga's consort
    Sazuko is pregnant.  Yodoko urges Toranaga to take
    supreme power; he demurs.  She proposes that Toranaga
    marry Ochiba. (History of Ochiba, the Taiko, and how
    Yaemon was born.)

18. (p. 284)

    An Amida assassin enters Toranaga's keep. He kills three
    guards then encounters Kiri. She drops a tray, alerting
    everyone. The assassin attacks Blackthorne, but is
    thwarted and kills himself. (Toranaga deliberately sent
    Blackthorne to prison to meet Fr. Domingo; and arranged
    the ambush that freed him)

    Yabu meets with Toranaga, who asks him about how to
    contact the Amida Tong. Toranaga offers Yabu Suruga
    (Ikeya Jikkyu's fief) and Totomi as well, if he will
    become Toranaga's vassal.  Ishido offered him Suruga.
    Yabu suggests a regiment of five hundred gun-samurai,
    and Blackthorne as teacher, with Mariko to teach him
    Japanese.  Toranaga agrees, and they piss on it.
    Hiro-matsu is aghast that Toranaga would agree to such a
    plan.

19. (p. 301)

    Fr. Alvito goes to see the Father-Visitor, Carlo
    dell'Aqua, who is meeting with Captain-General Ferriera.
    Toranaga is holding up the departure of the Black Ship,
    due to Blackthorne's revelations of how much the
    Portuguese are gauging Japan on the silk trade. Ferriera
    declares that Blackthorne should be killed, and Toranaga
    ignored. The Jesuits disagree, and an argument ensues
    over whether Ferriera will interfere in Japan's internal
    politics. Ferriera fears any attack, particularly by the
    Erasmus. Ferriera leaves, and Alvito and dell'Aqua
    discuss Blackthorne.  Where is he getting his
    information? Dell'Aqua orders Alvito to put pressure on
    Mariko to reveal what she knows.  (Alvito's life
    history.) Alvito and dell'Aqua plan to gain Toranaga's
    help with 25% of the brokerage fees from the Black
    Ship's silks, pressuring Onoshi and Kiyama to offer
    this. They will give Toranaga the rutters. Friar Perez
    comes in, preparing to make trouble, stirring up the
    Japanese Christians.

20. (p. 320)

    Blackthorne luxuriates; meets a doctor; is told he is
    being sent away to recuperate. Blackthorne does a
    hornpipe for Toranaga; then teaches him how. Toranaga
    orders Blackthorne to learn Japanese. Blackthorne almost
    insults Toranaga.  Blackthorne and Mariko discuss his
    former life. Mariko embarasses him by talking about sex.
    (How the Jesuits turned Goroda against Mariko's father,
    driving him to assassinate the Dictator).

    Alvito brings the rutters to Toranaga. Description of
    the wealth of Osaka Castle. (Death of the Taiko.)
    Toranaga gets the rutters and gives the Black Ship
    permission to leave.  Toranaga asks Alvito for the
    church's support; in return exclusivity throughout
    Japan.

21. (p. 346)

    Kiritsubo prepares to leave Osaka Castle. Ishido and his
    Grays show up. Buntaro and Ishido quarrel. Hiro-matsu
    quiets things down. Ishido pays his respects to
    Kiritsubo and then leaves. Sazuko falls, and in the
    confusion Toranaga and Kiri switch. Blackthorne sees,
    because he doesn't understand what Kiri says when she
    shouts.

22. (p. 354)

    The two litters make their way to the exit from the
    castle. Blackthorne is terrified that he will give
    Toranaga away.  (Blackthorne fantasizes about the
    future, once he gets his ship back; rolling up the
    Portuguese empire like a carpet. If he can hire a crew
    at Nagasaki, he can take the Black Ship.) The reach the
    last checkpoint and Ishido appears. Ishido asks to give
    Kiri a message for his niece in Yedo. Blackthorne acts
    insane as a distraction. Ishido tries to kill
    Blackthorne, and Blackthorne fights back. Blackthorne
    dances through the gate. Yabu convinces Ishido not to
    kill Blackthorne. They leave.

23. (p. 363)

    The Grays refuse to let them go alone.  Blackthorne is
    exhausted; they put him in a litter. Blackthorne and
    Mariko talk; some of her past. She is beginning to feel
    warmly about him. In Japan women manage money; She tells
    about how her mother sold her hair to buy a feast for
    Goroda. Mariko confirms that the Gray captain speaks
    Latin.

    Kiyama's ambush begins. The ambushers are driven off,
    but Toranaga is revealed. Two grays escape to warn
    Ishido, the rest die.

24. (p. 376)

    Toranaga's party splits; ten go by a back route, the
    rest decoy by the planned route.  Toranaga leaves his
    resignation from the Regents with Hiro-matsu, so he
    can't be impeached. They rendezvous with some of
    Toranaga's secretly placed ronin.  They reach the
    galley, which is guarded by Grays.  They discuss setting
    the street afire. They arrange a diversion; Blackthorne
    and Mariko to say there was an ambush, then Mariko to
    faint if the ship is clear. Mariko reveals that she
    knows how to use a sword. They run for the ship. The
    Grays are fooled; all but a few leave the ship. Mariko
    decides reluctantly that the ship is safe, and faints.
    The Browns mingle with the Grays as thirty of Toranaga's
    ronin appear, and attack them before the Grays can
    attack the ronin. Blackthorne protects Mariko while the
    Browns gain the gangway.  Mariko attacks a Gray when
    Blackthorne is driven back.  She is wounded, but not
    badly, and the Grays are defeated.  Blackthorne
    collapses.

25. (p. 389)

    The ronin make the galley ready for sea, and the Browns
    set up a defensive position against Grays from the
    Portuguese ship.  Toranaga goes aboard, and Mariko is
    carried below. Suddenly, the castle comes alive; Ishido
    must know about the escape. The galley casts off.
    Buntaro, Sono and two Browns appear on the dock, pursued
    by Grays. They defeat the pursuers, and Blackthorne
    orders the galley to return, but Yabu countermands the
    order, and Toranaga will not be swayed.  Blackthorne
    signals them to swim. They throw an oar for the girl,
    but while she gets it, she can't swim, and ultimately
    drowns. Buntaro prepares to commit seppuku rather than
    risk capture. Mariko, supported by Fujiki, tries to
    explain this to Blackthorne.  The harbor mouth is
    blocked by fishing vessels carrying samurai.  Browns on
    horseback rescue Buntaro, who only goes with them
    because Toranaga orders him to do it.

26. (p. 398)

    They ask Blackthorne how to escape the harbor. "With
    cannon." So Toranaga orders them to the Portuguese
    frigate, which has cannon. Toranaga asks Mariko to
    renounce Christianity, but she refuses. He orders her to
    become friends with Blackthorne.

    The frigate has left its moorings, and Blackthorne
    realizes it is ready to attack them. They break out
    Toranaga's flag so the Portuguese will officially know
    he's aboard the galley. They decide to go within hailing
    distance, and Blackthorne will convince them to help;
    Toranaga requires the use of their cannon.

    Ferriera wants to blow the galley out of the water, but
    dell'Aqua refuses to let him.  Rodrigues, who is now
    pilot of the Black Ship, agrees with Ferriera. Ferriera
    wants to get Blackthorne and Toranaga.  Rodrigues sees
    the galley is heading to windward, so he orders the
    Santa Theresa to sea.  Rodrigues reluctantly points out
    Toranaga. Dell'Aqua orders them not to fire.

    They maneuver, the galley trying to get to windward and
    bottle up the frigate, and the frigate trying to gain
    sea room; to no avail. Alvito and dell'Aqua take a
    longboat to confer with Toranaga. Ferriera suggests they
    bring back Blackthorne.

    Toranaga asks for escort out of the harbor. He agrees to
    come to the frigate to negotiate with Ferriera, and the
    priests suggest he bring Blackthorne so that Rodrigues
    can thank him. Blackthorne refuses, but Alvito describes
    the food aboard, and he changes his mind.

    Rodrigues puts Blackthorne in his cabin to gorge and
    vomit where Toranaga won't be offended.

27. (p. 420)

    Negotiations. Toranaga will allow them to build a
    cathedral in Yedo if they help him get out of the
    harbor. The priests suggest they sell him cannon, but
    Ferriera says the galley can't use cannon. Ferriera says
    he will help for various concessions from the church,
    including Blackthorne.

    Mariko looks after Blackthorne, cleaning and dressing
    him, and is propositioned by a Portuguese bosun.
    Blackthorne and Mariko go up on deck. Rodrigues' spy
    fills him in on the negotiations. Rodrigues tells Mariko
    about his Japanese wife. Rodrigues has Blackthorne
    thrown overboard to save him from Ferriera, and sends
    Santiago to warn him and give him advice.

    The frigate is to carry Toranaga to Yedo, the priests
    are to go ashore and smooth things with Ishido, the
    galley to be left to its own devices. Blackthorne hauls
    down Toranaga's banner, the frigate makes for the sea.

28. (p. 441)

    The two ships duel; Blackthorne making for the harbor
    mouth ahead of the frigate, and Rodrigues trying to
    avoid ramming him (which is what Ferriera wants him to
    do).  There is a one hundred yard gap in the waiting
    fishing boats. Blackthorne maneuvers to starboard of the
    frigate, where the attackers are afraid to attack for
    fear of hurting the Portuguese. (This was Rodrigues'
    idea.) Rodrigues tries to run Blackthorne onto the reef,
    but Blackthorne fires at him and forces him to give way.
    They both leave the harbor, and Toranaga goes back to
    his galley.

29. (p. 451)

    Blackthorne sleeps for 36 hours.  They are off the coast
    of Totomi province. Toranaga has him awakened; asks him
    to eat and swim.  Blackthorne, embarrassed by everyone's
    nakedness, dives into the water.  Toranaga is impressed
    and asks to be taught how to dive. Toranaga belly-flops
    but finally does a passable dive. Mariko does a perfect
    one, but only Blackthorne notices.

    Toranaga questions him about England, and about sea
    power. Blackthorne offers to bring them a navy from
    England. Toranaga says he wishes Blackthorne could speak
    Japanese; Blackthorne asks for a dictionary, noting that
    the Jesuits have them.

    As they approach Izu, there is an earthquake;
    Blackthorne has never seen one before.

Book Three:

30. (p. 467)

    In Anjiro, they have been preparing for Toranaga's
    arrival. They built a temporary fortress and a new
    house. Mura has stolen and hidden thirty koku of rice --
    and weapons. It is illegal for peasants to possess
    weapons.  The galley arrives.

    Toranaga orders Fujiko to become Blackthorne's consort
    for six months.

    Yabu tries to entice Toranaga to stay in Anjiro
    overnight, but Toranaga wiggles out, fearing Yabu. They
    go ashore, and Toranaga inspects Yabu's troops. (Lady
    Sazuko is a spy for Yabu.) Yabu learns that Toranaga has
    resigned, and he's shocked. Toranaga explains.  Toranaga
    gives Yabu his priceless sword, which he got from
    Nakamura.  (Flashback to how Toranaga ended up a vassal
    of Nakamura.) Toranaga departs before Yabu can realize
    he's been had.

    Blackthorne is furious at being left in Anjiro. Yabu
    realizes that the guns are still on the galley. Toranaga
    has made Blackthorne a hatamoto; he must learn Japanese
    quickly. Yabu tells the villagers that if Blackthorne
    doesn't learn Japanese within six months they will all
    be crucified.

31. (p. 490)

    Blackthorne goes to his house, distressed by Yabu's
    threat. Mariko tells Blackthorne that Fujiko is to be
    his consort. She tries to convince Blackthorne to go
    along with this. Omi arrives and asks for Blackthorne's
    pistols. Blackthorne gives his pistols to Fujiko,
    ordering her to protect them with her life. Blackthorne
    is ready to leave, but Fujiko gives him two samurai
    swords first, as a hatamoto must wear them.

    Yabu tells Omi to apologize to Blackthorne.  Omi has
    already decided he must kill Yabu, for insulting his
    wife and mother. (Yabu's plans for secret training of a
    gun regiment.)  Yabu asks Blackthorne to train his men,
    and to teach him how Europeans make war.  Blackthorne
    agrees, if Yabu will rescind his decree about the
    villagers and ask Toranaga for his ship back in five
    months. Yabu agrees to ask Toranaga about the ship, but
    won't budge on the villagers.  Blackthorne says he will
    have to commit suicide, then. Omi suggests that Yabu
    define "satisfactorily" flexibly.  Yabu refuses, eager
    to see if Blackthorne is bluffing. Blackthorne tries to
    thrust the knife into heart, but Omi stops him, barely,
    and he and Igurashi wrest the knife from him.
    Blackthorne manages to stand and walk away. Everyone is
    incredibly impressed.  Omi suggests that Yabu ask Mariko
    to stay for a full month, as she can help Blackthorne
    train the musketeers, and she is a good hostage. (Ochiba
    is no longer a hostage.)

32. (p. 519)

    Twelve days later, a courier from Osaka arrives. Ishido
    is suspicious of Yabu.  In twenty days, the Council of
    Regents will meet, and Yabu is summoned to renew his
    oath of fealty; Ito Teruzumi has filled the vacancy left
    by Toranaga, so the Council is whole again. All daimyos
    are invited. Omi suggests they have one of the Regents
    assassinated; throw in totally with Toranaga.  Omi
    points out that the new council doesn't exist yet; this
    gives them time to maneuver. Igurashi suggests they kill
    Jozen.  Yabu asks how they can remove Jozen without
    danger: somehow set a trap with Naga.

    How to speak Japanese. Blackthorne and Mariko bathe
    together. Mariko tells him that Fujiko has a pheasant
    one of the peasants caught. Blackthorne eats the
    pheasant and he, Mariko and Fujiko all get drunk.

    Naga declares to Jozen his disgust with guns. Masumoto
    is sent with Yabu's report on the training. Jozen's
    pigeon was intercepted.

    Blackthorne and Mariko make love for the first time.

33. (p. 548)

    Mariko pretends nothing happened the previous night;
    that it was her maid. Mariko suggests he use Kiku.
    Mariko predicts (unseriously) that Blackthorne will
    never get his navy, never leave Japan.

    Mock battle; Jozen is uncomprehending. The gun regiment
    "wins." Jozen is impressed; he asks that Blackthorne be
    killed and the guns withdrawn. They discuss swords, and
    Omi threatens him with bayonets. Naga threatens Jozen;
    he shows him the dead pigeon and Masumoto's head. Yabu
    tells him to release Jozen; Jozen refuses.  Blackthorne
    is a witness; Naga's men gut and hamstring Jozen;
    Jozen's men commit seppuku with great honor. Jozen is
    left to the dogs.

    A storm comes, but the village is repaired quickly; no
    fires.

34. (p. 570)

    Ten days later, Toranaga comes ashore. He wants to see
    an exercise. Yabu must decide whether to leave for
    Osaka. There will be an entire regiment of musketeers,
    commanded by Buntaro. Mariko delivers her report to
    Toranaga on board the galley; the musket regiment will
    win one battle, the character of Yabu and Omi, etc.
    (Buntaro's escape from Osaka.) Toranaga goes hunting and
    sends a pheasant and a hare to Blackthorne.

    Blackthorne hangs the pheasant. He cleans and cooks the
    hare, grossing out everyone. Fujiko arranges to get a
    non-Buddhist cook to avoid trouble. Buntaro is to stay
    with Blackthorne.

35. (p. 588)

    Blackthorne greets Buntaro formally. Blackthorne says he
    would like to see Buntaro shoot his bow. They eat
    dinner, and Buntaro decides to demonstrate his archery.
    Buntaro shoots five arrows into a post through a closed
    shoji, all within an inch of each other. Buntaro gets
    drunk, and Blackthorne asks about how he and Mariko came
    to be married; Mariko must tell how her father was
    Akechi Jinsai, who assassinated Goroda. Buntaro passes
    out. Later, he awakens and beats Mariko, then staggers
    off.  Blackthorne goes to help her, but she refuses.
    Blackthorne goes to kill Buntaro, but Buntaro bows
    abjectly, as he has violated propriety by disturbing
    Blackthorne's house.  To save face, Blackthorne blames
    it on the sake.

36. (p. 610)

    Toranaga goes hunting with his falcon. He loses patience
    with Naga, who has counseled a conservative course.
    Tetsu-ko kills a wily old cock pheasant. He orders Naga
    to become Blackthorne's friend. (Toranaga's anger at
    Buntaro for beating Mariko; Buntaro's love/hate of
    Mariko. Toranaga trying to walk Blackthorne into the
    ground.  Yabu's becoming Toranaga's vassal, giving him
    the Murasama sword as a token, Toranaga ordering it
    thrown into the sea.)  A pigeon arrives from Osaka.

37. (p. 622)

    Sugiyama has resigned, as planned.  Some daimyos have
    escaped, but many families are still hostage in Osaka.
    Toranaga calls his advisors together; Yabu and Buntaro
    advise "Crimson Sky," Omi suggests a defensive strategy.
    Toranaga tells them he will order "Crimson Sky," not
    after the rains, but now; and use the musket regiment to
    blast a way through the mountains to Osaka.  Toranaga
    asks Mariko to buy Kiku's contract.  Mariko advises him
    to marry Ochiba and become Shogun.  She also says that
    she must go to Osaka.

38. (p. 637)

    Blackthorne discovers Ueki-ya has committed suicide due
    to having taken down the rotten pheasant.  Naga asks to
    be Blackthorne's friend. (Mariko related how the matter
    of the pheasant was dealt with.)  Blackthorne is shamed
    at his stupidity.  Suddenly, an earthquake begins.
    Acleft opens and Toranaga topples in; Blackthorne grabs
    his sash and is pulled in with him.  Blackthorne drags
    Toranaga to safety.  Another shock opens a fissure which
    swallows Mariko. Blackthorne crawls in to get her, and
    Toranaga pulls him out by his sash. Blackthorne manages
    to thrust Mariko up to Toranaga, and barely climbs out
    himself.  Igurashi was killed, others only bruised.
    Blackthorne retrieves his sword and gives it to
    Toranaga.  He goes to look after Fujiko; his house is
    aburnt-out ruin.

39. (p. 650)

    Fujiko was badly burned in the fire.  Blackthorne names
    a rock after Ueki-ya. Omi arrives and offers Blackthorne
    the use of his bath.  Blackthorne meets Omi's mother.

    Blackthorne and Toranaga discuss the Erasmus and the
    Black Ship.  Toranaga promises to give Blackthorne an
    answer when they reach Yedo.  He promises Mariko to
    order her divorced after Ishido is dealt with.

    Toranaga announces an edited version of his plan.  He
    gives Blackthorne a fief worth two thousand koku, gifts,
    and swords.  Inside, he is furious that his people think
    any war is feasible now; better to wait for Ishido to
    strangle himself.

40. (p. 675)

    Mariko negotiates with Gyoko-san for Kiku's services and
    her contract, not mentioning until the end that the
    services are for Blackthorne. Blackthorne and Mariko
    spend the evening with Kiku, who realizes that they are
    in love.  Kiku shows them some sex aids, and he grows
    angry about how backward England is.  Mariko leaves
    them.

41. (p. 700)

    Zataki has been appointed to the Council, and is coming
    to visit, along with Tsukku-san.  They will meet at
    Yokose, in the mountains.

    Omi comes to fetch Blackthorne, who gains much prestige
    by his night with Kiku, and his correct behavior
    afterwards.

    Mariko buys Kiku's contract for three thousand koku;
    twenty-five hundred if Toranaga will speak to Gyoko for
    one stick of time.  Blackthorne shows up, and Toranaga
    tells him he and Mariko will go to Shuzenji Spa, and
    then she will go on to Osaka, and Blackthorne to Yedo.
    Blackthorne asks Toranaga to help select his two hundred
    samurai.

    Blackthorne gives Omi the hint that he should try to
    recover Toranaga's swords.

42. (p. 728)

    Toranaga arrives at Yokose.  Toranaga orders Buntaro to
    make peace with Mariko.  Saigawa Zataki arrives for the
    meeting.  The Regents order Toranaga to Osaka.  If he
    refuses, he is to commit seppuku.  He temporizes, saying
    he will answer tomorrow.  Zataki asks Yabu to betray
    Toranaga, but he refuses. Yabu is then ordered to Osaka.
    Toranaga needles Yabu for his stupidity in not drawing
    Zataki out.

    Toranaga meets with Gyoko, who proposes the invention of
    geisha. Toranaga is interested, and tells her that it is
    he who has bought Kiku's contract.

    Apostasy of Brother Joseph; Alvito fetched to see
    Toranaga.

43. (p. 754)

    Alvito explains about Joseph to Toranaga. Alvito has
    brought maps for Toranaga, and the dictionary for
    Blackthorne.  The Black Ship arrived fourteen days ago.
    Alvito tells Toranaga that he could not persuade Kiyama
    or Onoshi to back him.  Toranaga threatens to unleash
    Blackthorne.  Toranaga thinks the Jesuits are plotting
    to support Kiyama as Shogun, aided by Conquistadores.

    Buntaro's tea ceremony for Mariko.  They are drawn
    together by the ceremony, but Buntaro threatens
    Blackthorne. Buntaro is convinced she has betrayed him.

44. (p. 777)

    Toranaga replies to Zataki that he will obey the will of
    the Council; everyone is amazed and disgusted at his
    cowardice. Mariko and Blackthorne are sent to Yedo
    together, and then Mariko will continue to Osaka.  (The
    morning's hunting; the oil seller who blocked
    Blackthorne's way and was killed by Toranaga's order.
    Alvito gives Blackthorne the dictionary. He says that
    Toranaga is doomed. He predicts that Blackthorne will
    never leave.) Mariko tricks Gyoko into lowering Kiku's
    price.  Mariko and Yoshinaka discuss the guard
    arrangements for the journey.

45. (p. 791)

    The journey to Mishima.  Mariko and Blackthorne are
    together every night.  Kiku and Gyoko know.  Omi catches
    up and asks Kiku to join him, but she refuses. Yoshinaka
    suspects, but is careful not to see.  Alvito is told by
    one of his men that he thinks they are lovers; Alvito is
    shocked.

46. (p. 803)

    Mariko reports to Hiro-matsu at Mishima.  Hiro-matsu
    secretly wants to have Sudara and Genjiko declare
    Crimson Sky without Toranaga, if he refuses.

    Gyoko returns to her house. Secrets she has heard; most
    importantly that Lord Zataki desires Ochiba, and that
    Toranaga seems untroubled.

    Rodrigues, hearing Alvito's report on Blackthorne,
    resolves to go ashore to visit him and perhaps kill him.

    Blackthorne and Mariko make love, and Rodrigues comes to
    visit.  Yoshinaka makes him give up his weapons.  They
    talk, the lack of trust ruining the occasion.

Book Four:

47. (p. 833)

    They arrive in Yedo. Gyoko bargains with Mariko; three
    of her secrets for the thousand koku or making her son a
    samurai.  The secrets are what Harima said in
    confessional, Omi's plot against Yabu, and Zataki's lust
    for Ochiba. Gyoko offers to reduce her fee by five
    hundred koku if Toranaga will make her son samurai.

    Mariko relays the information to Toranaga, who acts
    uninterested, and also tells him about Alvito and
    Blackthorne quarreling.  Buntaro asks for Blackthorne's
    head; Toranaga says he can have it after acting as
    Toranaga's second.  Toranaga sends Buntaro to deliver a
    message to Toranaga's mother in Takato.

    Toranaga is excited by the secrets; Onoshi has made a
    secret treaty against Kiyama with Ishido.  Zataki lusts
    after Ochiba.  Toranaga has only been acting defeated;
    he needs to gain time, and accepting the second scroll
    would mean death.  He sends a letter to his brother,
    offering him Ochiba and the lands of the Christian
    daimyos.

    Buntaro and Mariko quarrel.  Buntaro suggests Toranaga
    be invited to commit seppuko, as he has obviously given
    up.

    Toranaga orders Blackthorne to make the Erasmus
    seaworthy.  Blackthorne asks three favors.  First, to
    see his crew.  Second, he proposes he attack Nagasaki
    and the Kyushu daimyos.  Third, he asks to marry Mariko.
    Toranaga grants only the first.

48. (p. 859)

    Blackthorne visits his crew in the eta district of Yedo.
    Sonk the cook, Vinck, Croocq the boy, Ginsel the
    sailmaker, Baccus van Nekk, and Jan Roper the merchant
    have survived.  They tell him Toranaga's men fixed the
    ship under Vinck's direction.  He tells them they will
    be at sea again in a month.  The crew tell their story,
    and Blackthorne realizes they are in an eta village.  He
    returns to the castle and bathes to remove the filth of
    his visit.

    Blackthorne inspects the Erasmus.  Fujiko returns.
    
49. (p. 874)

    Blackthorne examines Fujiko's burns, which are healing
    perfectly, and shows her his dictionary.  They meet with
    Toranaga, and later Mariko tells Toranaga about her
    quarrel with Buntaro, and his treasonous suggestions.

    Toranaga confronts Sudara and Genjiko, ordering Sudara
    to kill his own children to prove his loyalty, having
    previously secured them from harm.

    Toranaga calls a meeting of his generals, who are in a
    state of agitation and discontent.  General Kiyoshio
    indicts Toranaga, and is ordered to commit seppuku.
    Toranaga is trying to buy time for Zataki to reply to
    his letter.

50. (p. 894)

    Blackthorne sees Mariko.  He is impatient with Toranaga.
    He sleeps with Fujiko for the first time.  (Mariko and
    Blackthorne looking at a pillow book on the journey.
    Mariko tells him he must learn how to drink cha from an
    empty cup.)  Blackthorne decides that first and last
    he's a Pilot.

    Zataki replies; he agrees.  Toranaga meets with
    Hiro-matsu, who asks him not to leave for Osaka.
    Toranaga, laughing agrees; he never intended to go to
    Osaka.  He has bought a month and given up nothing.
    Hiro-matsu must help him maintain the pretense that he's
    defeated, and continue delaying.

    Mariko is given her papers and some messages.  She sees
    Gyoko as well, and they exchange veiled threats.

    Blackthorne and Mariko meet at the Erasmus; Alvito
    arrives, then Yabu in place of Toranaga.  Yabu returns
    the silver from the ship, gives Blackthorne permission
    to sail it, and gives him a crew, among them Uraga, the
    apostate priest.  Yabu fights with one of Blackthorne's
    samurai, and kills him.

    Yabu returns home and meets with Misuni, his brother and
    Omi's father.  He reports that with silver stolen from
    the strongbox they have bribed Jikkyu's cook to poison
    him.  Yuriko advises Yabu that Toranaga is not beaten;
    he is conspiring with Zataki, releasing Blackthorne, and
    so on.  She advises Yabu to help Toranaga and
    Blackthorne, and see to it that Zataki gets a stray
    bullet in battle.

    Mariko has come to the same conclusion.  She meets with
    Gyoko, who has been questioned by Toranaga about Mariko
    and Blackthorne.  She reports that the attempted
    assassination of Blackthorne was paid for by Kiyama.
    Kiku is with child, possibly by Blackthorne or Toranaga
    or Omi.  She also warns Blackthorne to beware Uraga, who
    is Harima's nephew.

51. (p. 936)

    They secretly take the Erasmus to Yokohama.  Yabu asks
    to start anew and be Blackthorne's friend.  (He has
    gotten Toranaga's permission to go to Osaka to prepare
    for Toranaga's arrival, and to take Blackthorne with him
    as it's on the way to Nagasaki, where they can get
    sailors.)

    Alvito and Brother Michael; one of Blackthorne's men is
    an agent for the Jesuits, and he is given a message to
    carry to Nagasaki.  There are no carrier pigeons for
    Osaka or Nagasaki; Toranaga has confiscated them all.
    Mariko asks to say confession on the site of the new
    cathedral; she tells Alvito her conclusions about
    Toranaga, asks him to protect Blackthorne, and tells him
    the secrets she heard from Gyoko.  Alvito tells her to
    report this to the Father-Visitor at Osaka.

    Uraga and Blackthorne search for Christians among his
    men.  They must stamp on an icon.  One refuses and he is
    killed.

Book Five:

52. (p. 951)

    Blackthorne, Vinck, and Yabu go on to Osaka, sending the
    rest of the men back to Yedo.  A cutter bearing an
    official of the Council arrives; the Emperor himself
    will be receiving the obeisances of the daimyos.  This
    means Toranaga can no longer delay.

    Mariko arrives in Osaka.  All of Toranaga's people and
    many others are effectively held captive by Ishido.
    Uraga sneaks off to get a message from Yabu, and on his
    return is killed by an attack from fishing boats in the
    harbor.

53. (p. 981)

    Blackthorne is brought to the Castle to visit Ishido and
    Ochiba.  Blackthorne is received and duels verbally with
    Ishido.  He gives Ochiba a birthday gift.  He meets
    Mariko's son Saruji.  Kiyama speaks nastily about his
    sect of Christian.  They speak of Toranaga's approach,
    and a poetry competition is proposed.  Mariko states
    that she won't be able to compete, as she plans to leave
    with Kiritsubo and Sazuko to meet Toranaga.  They argue
    about whether she is confined, and whether she may
    leave, ordered by Toranaga.  Violence is averted only by
    the news that Yodoko is dying.

    Yabu thinks Mariko has been stupid, and should
    apologize.

    Mariko meets with Kiyama, who asks her to stay, and
    questions her real motives.  Saruji also asks, but she
    refuses.  She tells Kiyama about Onoshi's plot, and
    suggests that Ishido expects to use Blackthorne against
    the Christian daimyos.  She gives him a message from
    Toranaga about Ishido promising the Kwanto to Zataki as
    well as him, which shocks him.

54. (p. 1006)

    Mariko prepares to leave.  Kiritsubo reveals that having
    the Emperor visit was Toranaga's idea originally.
    Mariko meets Blackthorne and tells him her attempt to
    leave is all Toranaga's idea.  Blackthorne bids goodbye
    to Mariko and watches as her party prepares to leave.
    He watches a stone grow.

    Rodrigues is in Osaka, aboard the Santa Luz.  He almost
    killed Ferriera arguing over Blackthorne.

55. (p. 1021)

    Mariko begins.  She reaches the first gate, where a
    samurai tries to stop her, and Yoshinaka kills him, then
    is himself killed.  Twenty Grays fight twenty Browns
    until all the Browns are dead.  Kazuko kills a Gray
    guard, then is slaughtered by arrows.  Twenty more
    Browns and Grays fight.  Mariko comes out and attacks
    the last Gray. He gives way slowly, but they are
    surrounded.  Mariko returns to her litter and announces
    that due to the shame of not being allowed to obey
    Toranaga, she will commit seppuku at sunset.

56. (p. 1027)

    Many ladies join Mariko, including the venerable Maeda
    Etsu; everyone is impressed by Mariko's efforts.

    Ochiba, Kiyama, and Ishido argue about what to do.
    Ishido proposes capturing Mariko and disarming her.
    They exit to see the dying Yodoko.

    Yodoko suggests that Mariko be allowed to leave but that
    she be watched and delayed inside the borders.  She also
    suggests that Ochiba marry Toranaga.  Yodoko dies.
    (Flashback to the Taiko's death, Toranaga's promises.
    Ochiba's memory of how Yaemon was conceived with a
    peasant, and Toranaga might have seen.  How the Taiko's
    first-born may have been conceived by someone else when
    Ochiba was drugged by Yodoko.)

    Mariko will commit seppuku in public.  She meets with
    Blackthorne, then prepares.  She asks Yabu to be her
    second. She is ready to die when Ishido appears,
    interrupts, and gives her permits to leave the next day.
    He says anyone can leave if they apply to.  Mariko tries
    to stand, but cannot, and finally Blackthorne carries
    her inside.

57. (p. 1050)

    The ninja attack that night.  Ten use muffled grapples
    to reach the top floor; the only floor whose windows are
    wide enough to enter. They kill ten Browns.  Twenty
    enter through a disused culvert, twenty more use ropes
    to attack the battlement.  They kill two Brown guards,
    losing one of their own men: wounded, he commits suicide
    with a poison shiriken.  Sumiyori wakens Yabu for the
    change of guard; it's an hour before dawn.  Sumiyori is
    afraid of an ambush; Yabu kills him.  (Ishido has
    offered Yabu a safe-conduct for himself and Blackthorne
    if he ensures that Mariko is disarmed during an ambush.)
    Yabu checks on Blackthorne and Mariko.  Achiko and Etsu
    are staying with Mariko.

    Yabu is going to make an inspection.  He lets the ninja
    into the cellar.  Yabu leads them through the corridors
    to a secret door, then goes ahead and sounds the alarm.
    It is intended to divert attention from the main attack,
    an attempt to kidnap Mariko.  The red-spot ninja leader,
    too impatient, gives the attack signal a moment too
    soon.  Blackthorne shoots him, slowing the attack, and
    gets the door barred just in time.  The ninja try to
    break down the door as Blackthorne shoots them through
    the crack.  Kiri leads them to the secret strongroom.
    The door goes down and Blackthorne and Mariko run.
    Chimmoko dies defending them.  Blackthorne and Mariko
    reach the door and bolt it barely in time.  The
    defenders realize that the ninja are after Mariko, and
    begin to fight their way towards the cul-de-sac in the
    east wing.
    
    The attackers threaten to blow up the door.  They claim
    they want Blackthorne, and Mariko barely prevents him
    from opening the door.  Then he tries to open the door
    to the battlements while Mariko delays the ninja.  The
    ninja leader decides to blow the door, even though he
    fears that it will kill everyone inside.  Mariko
    flattens herself against the door, and it is blown in,
    mortally wounding her.  The ninja pour in, killing only
    Kiyama Achiko, as ordered.  The ninja retreat, covered
    by smoke, fire, and poisoned caltrops.  The defenders,
    including Yabu, break through.  Mariko dies.  Etsu
    formally accuses Ishido of the attack, then leaps to her
    death from the battlements.

58. (p. 1076)

    The Council of Regents meets to discuss a way out of the
    situation.  Ishido wants to cancel the safe conducts,
    but they outvote him. Kiyama predicts Toranaga will find
    a way to delay the Emperor's visit.  They vote to attack
    the Kwanto as soon as the visit is delayed.

    Blackthorne is deaf.  He is moved to protect him from
    Kiyama.  (Ishido had ordered Achiko killed in case she
    was going to assassinate Blackthorne.) Yaemon will be
    with Ishido's armies; Ishido predicts Toranaga will not
    dare attack then.

    dell'Aqua receives a message from Alvito at Mishima; he
    will see Toranaga They will bury Mariko's ashes in the
    cathedral at Nagasaki. dell'Aqua shows Perez the Pope's
    letter closing Japan to all but the Jesuits.  Perez
    refuses to accept it, predicting a Spanish Bishop will
    arrive at any time.  He also makes veiled references to
    Mariko's love affair with Blackthorne.

59. (p. 1097)

    Blackthorne's hearing is returning.  Ochiba and Kiri
    invite Blackthorne to Mariko's funeral.  Mariko's
    funeral.

    Blackthorne awakes and discovers he has no guards.  He
    is to be sent away to the galley; Brother Michael guides
    him.  They go through the city with an escort of
    Kiyama's samurai.  Blackthorne is famished and stops to
    eat some prawns, but has no money to pay; one of
    Kiyama's men pays.  They take him by the Jesuit mission
    and the lorcha with Ferriera and Rodrigues aboard.
    There is a stake prepared.  Blackthorne asks to die as a
    samurai, and Michael sees the stake for the first time.
    dell'Aqua and Ferriera face each other down over
    Blackthorne; Ferriera wants to kill him.  Ferriera backs
    down under threat of excommunication.  Pesaro tries to
    kill Blackthorne, but Kiyama's samurai kill him first.
    (dell'Aqua had pleaded with Kiyama to side with
    Toranaga, and spare Blackthorne; Kiyama agrees to stay
    neutral initially and to spare Blackthorne for Mariko's
    sake.)  Ferriera and dell'Aqua tell Blackthorne his ship
    has burned.  The galley returns to Yokohama.

Book Six:

60. (p. 1127)

    The Erasmus is a wreck.  Naga relates what happened, and
    how all witnesses were put to death.  Blackthorne
    decides Mariko must have told his enemies to leave him
    alive but destroy his ship.  Vinck goes mad and dies.
    Blackthorne buries Vinck then swims out to the wreck.
    Toranaga orders the galley to stay at Yokohama pending
    his arrival.

    Toranaga arrives.  He has arranged to delay the
    Emperor's visit to Osaka by bribing Ogaki, the courtier.
    Ishido will leave the castle to attack; Toranaga has
    sacrificed a queen to gain two castles, but he has also
    lost the ship.

    Toranaga reviews the troops.  Toranaga is outraged that
    the ship burned.  Toranaga tells Blackthorne he may kill
    Alvito if he wishes, but better not to.  Toranaga, Naga,
    etc. discuss whether Blackthorne will kill Alvito, and
    Toranaga predicts he will not.  Buntaro asks for
    Blackthorne's life; he is convinced Mariko dishonored
    him with Blackthorne.  Toranaga tells him no, that he
    had ordered Mariko to divorce Buntaro when she first
    suggested going to Osaka, but she refused.  This is a
    lie, of course, but Buntaro is satisfied.  Toranaga
    swims out to look at the wreck.  Toranaga sees his new
    son, then questions the Osaka sumurai, one by one.  He
    then talks to Kiri, who relays Ochiba's message that the
    Heir doesn't wish to lead any armies against Toranaga.
    Toranaga talks to Yabu, then Alvito, who denies any
    Christian burned the ship.  Alvito reports that now that
    the ship is gone, the Father-Vistor is able to give full
    attention to turning Kiyama and Onoshi.  Toranaga muses
    that he gave only the ship when he might have had to
    give Blackthorne as well, to prove his sincerity to
    Kiyama.  Toranaga interviews Blackthorne about Osaka,
    with Alvito translating.  Then he gives Blackthorne
    Mariko's last message.

    She tells him to build another ship.  He is elated at
    the idea, and Toranaga vows to help him.  He will call
    it the Lady.

61. (p. 1159)

    Toranaga goes hunting; flashback to meeting with Mariko;
    suggestion of burning ship, building another.  News of
    Jikkyu's death by poisoning, instigated by Yabu.  Yabu's
    treachery revealed; Toranaga orders him to commit
    suicide. Yabu gives his Yoshitomo sword to Blackthorne.
    Toranaga reinstates Sudara as his heir. Toranaga orders
    Crimson Sky via the Tokaido, as a feint. Toranaga gives
    Fujiko permission to die. Tells Gyoko he no longer wants
    Kiku. Appoints Omi commander of the Musket Regiment, but
    refuses to give him Kiku. Blackthorne begins to salvage
    the Erasmus. Meeting with Alvito. Toranaga musings; he
    burned the Erasmus, Mura is secretly his spy, he plans
    to give Kiku to Blackthorne.  How Mariko's death and the
    release of the hostages gained so much.  Releases
    Tetsu-ko as a gift to Mariko's soul. Predicts the course
    of events.

Epilogue. (p. 1211)

    Battle of Sekigahara, death of Ishido.
